AIE1001 Introduction to AIProgramming
Lecture 6
Recursion
Prof. Junjie Hu
School of Artificial Intelligence
Part of the slides are adapted from NJU SICP 
Outline
•Recursion 
•Concept of recursion 
•Base cases and recursive cases
•Recursion in Python
•Binary search
•Linear Recursion
•Multiple recursion
Suppose you're waiting in line for a concert.
You can't see the front of the line, but you want to know what your 
place in line is. Only the first 100 people get free t -shirts!
You can't step out of line because you'd lose your spot.
What should you do?

An iterative algorithm might say:
1.Ask my friend to go to the front of the line.
2.Count each person in line one -by-one.
3.Then, tell me the answer.
A recursive algorithm might say:
•If you're at the front, you know you're first.
•Otherwise, ask the person in front of you, "What 
number in line are you?"
•The person in front of you figures it out by asking 
the person in front of them who asks the person 
in front of them etc…
•Once they get an answer, they tell you and you 
add one to that answer.
Recursion is useful for solving problems with a naturally 
repeating structure -they are defined in terms of themselves
It requires you to find patterns of smaller problems, and to 
define the smallest problem possible
Recursion
Recursion
•Recursion is a technique by which a function makes 
one or more calls to itself during execution
•Recursion provides an elegant and powerful 
alternative for performing repetitive tasks
Example: The factorial function
•The factorial of a positive integer n, denoted n!, is defined as follows:
•The factorial function is important because it is known to equal the 
number of ways in which ndistinct items can be arranged into a 
sequence, that is, the number of permutations of nitems

The recursive definition
•First, a recursive definition contains one or more base cases , 
asimple situation with a known answer (no more function 
calls). Without it, the function would keep calling itself 
forever.
•Second, it also contains one or more recursive cases , away 
to reduce the problem to a smaller version of itself, and then 
usethe same function to solve that smaller problem and 
move toward the base case.
The recursive definition of 
factorial function
•The factorial function can be naturally defined in a recursive way, for 
example, 5! = 5 · (4 ·  3 ·  2 ·  1) = 5 ·  4!
•More generally, for a positive integer n, we can define n! to be n ·  
(n−1)!
•Therefore, the recursive definition of factorial function is:
Base case
Recursive case
Solution

How Python implements recursion
•In Python, each time a function (recursive or otherwise) is called, a 
structure known as an activation record or frame is created in main 
memory to keep track of what’s going on in that call.
•This activation record stores the function call’s parameters and local 
variables
•If a function calls another function: Python pauses the current 
function. Its activation record stores where in the code to 
resume once the called function finishes (last called, first to finish ).
The same function fact is called multiple 
times, each time solving a simpler 
problem
All the frames share the same parent -
only difference is the argument
What n evaluates to depends upon the 
current environment
What is fact(3)?
What is fact(2)?
What is fact(1)?
What is fact(0)?
fact(0) is 1Recursion inenvironment
diagram
Recursive tree -another way to 
visualize recursion
fact(3)
fact(2)
fact(1)
fact(0)3 
*
2 
*
1 
*
11126
1deffact(n):
2 """Calculates n!"""
3 if n == 0:
4 return 1
5 else:
6 return n *fact(n-1)
Example: Binary search
•A classic and very useful recursive algorithm, binary search , can be 
used to efficiently locate a target value within a sorted sequence of n
elements
•When the sequence is unsorted , the standard approach to search for 
a target value is to use a loop to examine every element, until either 
finding the target or exhausting the data set; This is known as the 
sequential search algorithm

Binary search and sequential search

Binary search
•When the sequence is sorted and indexable , binary search is a much 
more efficient algorithm
•For any index j, we know that all the values stored at indices 0, . . . , 
j−1are less than or equal to the value at index j, and all the values 
stored at indices j+1, . . . ,n−1 are greater than or equal to that at 
index j
31
Guess a number x, where x ∈[0,100]
The strategy of binary search
•We call an element of the sequence a candidate if, at the current 
stage of the search, we cannot rule out that this item matches the 
target
•The algorithm maintains two parameters, lowand high , such that all 
the candidate entries have index at least lowand at most high
•Initially, low = 0 and high = n−1 . We then compare the target value to 
the median candidate, that is, the item data[mid] with index
mid = (low+high)/2
The strategy of binary search
•If the target equals data[mid] , then we have found the item we 
are looking for, and the search terminates successfully
•If target < data[mid], then we recur on the first half of the 
sequence, that is, on the interval of indices from low to mid−1
•If target > data[mid], then we recur on the second half of the 
sequence, that is, on the interval of indices from mid+1 to high
Solution

Case 1: Target = 3
data = [1, 3, 5, 6, 16, 78, 100, 135, 900]

Case 2: Target = 900
data = [1, 3, 5, 6, 16, 78, 100, 135, 900]

Case 3: Target = 0
data = [1, 3, 5, 6, 16, 78, 100, 135, 900]

Practice: Power function
•Write a program to calculate the power function 𝑓𝑥,𝑛=
𝑥𝑛using Recursion. 
x*x*x* …*x
Solution:

A better recursive definition of power 
function

Solution:

Linear Recursion
•If a recursive function is designed so that each invocation of 
the body makes at most one new recursive call, this is know n
as linear recursion
•Calculating the factorial and performing binary search are 
both linear recursive algorithms, as there is only one 
recursive call in the function body
Linear Recursion
•If a recursive function is designed so that each invocation of 
the body makes at most one new recursive call, this is know n
as linear recursion
•Finding the smallest number and binary search are both 
linear recursive algorithms

Practice: Sum of a list
•Given a list of numbers, write a program to calculate 
the sum of this list using recursion
Solution:

n=3
n=2
n=1
n=0
n=3
n=2
n=1
n=0
01
101108

Multiple recursion
•When a function makes two or more recursive calls, 
we say that it uses multiple recursion
•Drawing the English ruler is a multiple recursion 
program
Example: Drawing an English ruler
•We denote the length of the tick 
designating a whole inch as the 
major tick length . 
•Between the marks for whole 
inches, the ruler contains a series 
of minor ticks , placed at intervals 
of 1/2 inch, 1/4 inch, and so on. 
•As the size of the interval 
decreases by half, the tick length 
decreases by one
Recursive implementation of English 
ruler
•An interval with a central tick length n≥ 1 is 
composed of:
An interval with a central tick length n−1
A single tick of length n
An interval with a central tick length n−1

Solution


The recursive 
trace for 
English ruler

Practice: Binary sum
•Write a function binarySum() to calculate the sum of a 
list of numbers. Inside binarySum() two recursive calls 
should be made

Practice: Binary sum

Practice: Binary sum

Solution:

Practice: Fibonacci sequence
•The Fibonacci Sequence is a series of numbers starting with 0and 1, 
where each succeeding number is the sum of the two preceding 
numbers. The sequence goes on infinitely. So, the sequence begins as :
0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, …
Solution:
•The ftells Python to evaluate expressions inside {}and insert them into 
the string.
•Very useful for dynamic text formatting.
