AIE1001 Introduction toAIProgramming
Lecture 8Object Oriented Programming II
Prof. Junjie Hu
School of Artificial Intelligence

Outline
•Inheritance
•Superclass and subclass
•Inheritance syntax
•more information about super and sub-class
•Overriding methods
•The object class
•Methods of the object class
•Polymorphism
•Dynamic binding
•Multiple Inheritance
OOP
•The object -oriented programming couples data and methods
together into objects

OOP
•The object oriented approach combines the power of the structural 
programming with an added dimension that integrates data with 
operations into objects
If-else, loop, structures!! Only objects!!
OOP
Geometric object

The code for GeometricObject

Circle andRectangle
•Wewant tohave similar data fields and methods as 
GeometricObject
•Wealso want some specialized data fields and methods

Inheritance
•OOP allows you to define new classes from existing classes. This is 
called inheritance
•Inheritance extends the power of the object -oriented paradigm by 
adding an important and powerful feature for reusing code
Superclass and subclass
•Inheritance enables you to define a general class (a superclass ) and 
later extend it to more specialized classes ( subclasses )
•You use a class to model objects of the same type. Different classes 
may have some common properties and behaviours that you can 
generalize in a class
•The specialized classes inherit the properties and methods from the 
general class.
Inheritance syntax
•The Circle class is derived from the GeometricObject class, based on 
the following syntax
•Circle class inherits the GeometricObject class, thus inheriting the 
methods getColor , setColor , isFilled , setFilled , and __str__
•The printCircle method invokes the __str__() method defined to 
obtain properties defined in the superclass

The code for Circle class
•A subclass inherits 
accessible data fields and 
methods from its 
superclass, but it can also 
have other data fields and 
methods
Circle andRectangle
The code for rectangle class

The code for testing Circle and 
Rectangle 

Some more information about super 
and sub -class
•A subclass is not a subset of its superclass; In fact, a subclass usually 
contains more information and methods than its superclass
•Inheritance models the is -a relationships, but not all is-a relationships 
should be modelled using inheritance
•Do not blindly extend a class just for the sake of reusing methods. For 
example, it makes no sense for a Tree class to extend a Person class, 
even though they share common properties such as height and 
weight. A subclass and its superclass must have the is -a relationship
Practice
What is the problem with the above code?
Overriding methods
•A subclass inherits methods from a superclass
•Sometimes it is necessary for the subclass to modify the 
implementation of a method defined in the superclass. This 
is referred to as method overriding
Example
•The __str__ method in the GeometricObject class returns the 
string describing a geometric object. This method can be 
overridden to return the string describing a circle
•The __str__() method is defined in the GeometricObject class and 
modified in the Circle class. Both methods can be used in the 
Circle class. To invoke the __str__ method defined in the 
GeometricObject class from the Circle class, use super().__ str__()
Practice
What would be the 
output of the following 
program?
The object class
•Every class in Python is descended from the object class
•The object class is defined in the Python library. If no inheritance is 
specified when a class is defined, its superclass is object by default

Methods of the object class
•The __str__() method returns a string description for the object
•Usually you should override the __str__() method so that it returns 
an informative description for the object
What is the output of this program?

Methods of the object class
•The __new__() method is automatically invoked when an object is 
constructed. This method then invokes the __init__() method to 
initialize the object. Normally you should only override the __init__() 
method to initialize the data fields defined in the new class
•The __eq__() method returns True if two objects are the same
What is the output of this program?

What is the 
output of this 
program?

Correct Python Style
•__new__() is 
responsible 
for creating a 
new object.
•__init__() is 
responsible 
for initializing 
it after 
creation.

Polymorphism
•The inheritance relationship enables a subclass to inherit 
features from its superclass with additional new features 
•A subclass is a specialization of its superclass; every instance 
of a subclass is also an instance of its superclass, but not vice 
versa
•Therefore, you can always pass an instance of a subclass to a 
parameter of its superclass type
Polymorphism and dynamic binding
•Polymorphism means that an object of a subclass can 
be passed to a parameter of a superclass type
•A method may be implemented in several classes 
along the inheritance chain
•Python decides which method is invoked at runtime. 
This is known as dynamic binding
Example

Output

Dynamic binding
•Dynamic binding works as follows: Suppose an object o is an instance 
of classes C1, C2, ..., Cn -1, and Cn, where C1 is a subclass of C2, C2 is a 
subclass of C3, ..., and Cn -1 is a subclass of Cn
•That is, Cn is the most general class, and C1 is the most specific class 
•In Python, Cn is the object class 
•If o invokes a method p, Python searches the implementation for the 
method p in C1, C2, ..., Cn -1, and Cn, in this order, until it is found

Example
•What would be the output of 
this program?

Example

Question
•Suppose you want to modify the displayObject function in previous 
example to perform the following tasks:
■Display the area and perimeter of a GeometricObject instance
■Display the diameter if the instance is a Circle, and the width and 
height if the instance is a Rectangle
Does this program work?

Isinstance () function
•The isinstance ()function can be used to determine whether an object 
is an instance of a class
•This function determines whether an object is an instance of a class 
by using the following syntax


Practice
What would be the outputs?
Practice

Questions
(a) Is goldenDelicious an instance of Fruit ?
(b) Is goldenDelicious an instance of Orange ?
(c) Is goldenDelicious an instance of Apple ?
(d) Is goldenDelicious an instance of GoldenDelicious ?
(e) Is goldenDelicious an instance of McIntosh ?
(f) Is orange an instance of Orange ?
(g) Is orange an instance of Fruit ?
(h) Is orange an instance of Apple ?
(i) Suppose the method makeAppleCider is defined in the Apple class. Can 
goldenDelicious invoke this method? Can orange invoke this method?
( j) Suppose the method makeOrangeJuice is defined in the Orange class. Can 
orange invoke this method? Can goldenDelicious invoke this method?
Practice: course class

Answer

Answer

Multiple Inheritance
•In Python, we can define new class from multiple classes
•This is called multiple inheritance
•Multiple inheritance is a feature in which a class can inherit 
attributes and methods from more than one parent class
Inheritance Tree
•The inheritance relationship in Python can be represented by 
a tree structure
Example

Example

